Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host as always Ricardo Loops.
And today I'm joined by Doctor James mccann. He's
Professor Emeritus of History at Boston University. His research
and teaching interests include agricultural and ecological history of Africa
, Ethiopia, and the Horn of Africa field research
methods in African studies, the Agroecology of tropical disease
and the history of food slash cuisine in Africa and
the Atlantic world. And today we are going to
focus mostly on his book, Maize and Grace,
a History of Africa's Encounter with the new world crop
. So, Doctor mccann, welcome to the show
. It's a huge pleasure to everyone. Thank you
for your invitation. So, uh let's start,
I guess at the beginning. So uh we're going
to talk about maize here today. Where did maize
originate from? Maize is a new world crop that
was um domesticated by peoples in Mesoamerica. And it's
difficult, we don't know the exact the first example
of something we would call maize in the common term
. But there are examples of, of um archaeological
evidence of forgive the bat cave where they found something
that looks a bit like maize that has is on
a, on the ear with a, with a
cob. Um And the evolution is the experimentation by
local farmers. We don't know men and women both
were involved probably. But we don't really know that
in Mesoamerica, but the characteristics that were evolved over
time was farmer selection of certain characteristics they wanted to
have available in their own diets and their own food
. And maize is remarkable and it's spread internationally.
That's why my interest in the arrival of maize and
its propagation in Africa. It it's about farmer household
, local knowledge only to some degree about elite a
applications. So it's the earliest history we don't really
know for sure. The spread me America into North
America and as far as New England. And for
example, this is an exa example of a New
England flint and eight rows and it's not something commercially
viable, but it represents the kind of movement of
, of, of Mays into new environments. This
other example here you see this looks like what Columbus
would have brought with him. He brought Mays back
from the Caribbean, a Caribbean red flint, which
is this one to Europe and he sent it to
his friends in different places in Germany and Italy and
Spain. And it began to be experimented with and
eventually was taken over by farmers themselves who were the
key innovators both in Africa and in Europe. When
May spread as this popular crop that had certain characteristics
that were overwhelmingly popular with farmers as they sought to
both be commercial but also to feed their local populations
. And what are some of those characteristics? What
are the most distinct traits of mace maize is one
, it is wind pollinated in another. It's not
pollinated by insects or by um by other means.
And on the maize plant, you have both male
and female parts of the plant plant. So it
can self pollinate. But for the most part,
the wind moves the pollen between fields and between plants
. So you get automatically a mix, genetic mixing
that gives you a final result of texture color and
the characters characteristics of the plant itself. So it
has this characteristic that farmers have, have, have
the ability to control it by by hand moving the
column. Um so that they have characteristics that they
favor whether it's color or texture or for example,
how long it stores? Uh some varieties of maize
do not store very long at all, you have
to consume them or they go bad, other ones
will last longer. So farmers are making these choices
over generations. What the end result is? You
find the difference between these two. I would say
it's all about the farmer choices. Another lead scientist
, the farmer choices at the early level and the
popularity of it as it spread around the world was
because it was controllable along with other new world.
Um additions like capsicum pepper. We can't recognize world
cuisines without recognizing the contribution of pepper capsicum. Uh
In Indian, Indian Ethiopia, all varieties of taste
that we value coming from those new world exchanges with
new world. Yeah. And uh what are some
of the ways maize differs from other uh common crops
? Well, as I said, the wind pollination
factor is something that farmers have to learn to control
all the way to Monsanto. Suing farmers for the
pollen being carried by the wind across fields in Iowa
um or or elsewhere where the control of the pollen
is the key issue about how do you make it
commercially viable. Um But the the difference when something
like wheat, wheat is wheat is self pollinating,
it doesn't, the pollen does not move more than
a few microns from different parts of the plant.
Rice is is self pollinating. Uh So maize dis
distinctive and it is wind pollinated, not insect pollinated
and that makes a huge difference. But farmers understood
this pretty quickly when any place where we see where
maize has become adapted as a ma a major crop
, you see that farmers are adjusting their own knowledge
systems to the characteristics of maize. Maize is hermaphrodite
. It represents both genders on the same club,
but it also is uh I guess morally and and
unquestionably about sharing sexual engagements, right? And so
, I mean, we're also going to talk about
how maize spread across the globe and specifically uh in
Africa. Uh but what are, are there specific
ecological conditions where maize produces high higher yields, where
it grows, it grows and is farmed the best
? Well, of course, that's a key characteristic
. And when maize came from, you know,
directly, for example, from, from the Atlantic
trade with Brazil and the trade, the Atlantic trade
of course has is a complex interaction of sugar and
human labor, forced labor, you know, slaves
um going across and carrying maize as a potential crop
brought into the African case into West Africa, later
into Southern Africa. But also up the Nile and
into the Indian Ocean world where the word the the
Kiswahili word for maize is Muindi. It's from India
. It doesn't come, didn't come from India.
But the the understanding, the popular understanding of where
this thing came from became the name. If we
look at the name for maize in different cultures,
different languages. We learned a lot about people's perceptions
of that crop. Um In, in Malawi,
for example, the word the word for, for
maize, it means um from our ancestors, even
though it came fairly late into place like Malawi,
we replaced sorghum. Sorghum is not as productive as
maize and, and farmers at each location, whether
it's tropical, subtropical um or somewhat um affected by
the amount of moisture available by rainfall by, by
climate farmers adjusted to that. So you see the
varieties of maize in all over the world ad adapted
and again, not so much like recent times by
corporations who are, who are attempting to make maize
science. And that's the sort of dominant the farmers
made this choice every year when they selected their seeds
, they would, they would choose some of the
, some of the Mazier for seed and some for
consumption. And the seed represented their sense of what
they identified is the characteristics they wanted. And that
includes the maize plant as forage, for animals.
So for example, in Italy, the the the
the the fact that the farm that the peasant farmers
were able to use the maize plant, not just
the the the ear, but the plant itself to
feed their cattle meant that they could keep the cattle
in the barns on their farm and not send them
into the mountains in the winter. And what they
get from that is distinctive kinds of products of the
animals were eating the maize such as Parmesan, such
as Gorgonzola, the cheeses, Italians, Italy is
so well known for is part of the product of
maize is at the core feeding of the animals.
So they can be kept in the barns and fed
over the course of the winter. And thus ST
storing the the milk in the form of cheese.
So it's not that uh maize uh only uh I
mean grows well or produces a good yield, good
yields in specific climates. I mean different kinds of
maize have been adapted to different sorts of uh climates
and environments. Yeah. With the restrictions on maize
, within the constraints that farmers would respect would would
um develop is maize is is vulnerable to drought moisture
sensitive. So if you, if you have a
drought prone area, either seasonally or within a year
, you have to realize that maize is vulnerable to
, to moisture, to moisture uh availability. The
other way, maize tends does not store as long
as other crops, millets store for a very long
time. Ethiopian crop tiff will, will store for
years. Maze, you get four months, maybe
maximum six months but unlikely. So you've got to
eat it, move it, preserve it somehow.
So it has those constraints on maze. And so
that's why you don't see maze as a domino c
everywhere. OK. Uh And when it comes,
uh we've, you've already mentioned some of that but
when it comes how and why it spread across the
globe apart from the trades you've already mentioned, were
there any specific, for example, political or economic
reasons for it to become so widespread? Uh uh
Well, yes, one, it's, here's an
example and this is not from the Africa work I
did, but the work I've done in Italy where
the key crop for the veto. Venice was an
empire, an empire of trade. But they,
the, the, the Venetian patricians, the rich
folks in Venice itself told the farmers on the terra
firma of who they controlled that. You will pay
your taxes and wheat. And the farmer said wheat
doesn't work well here in northern northern Italy, wheat
works in southern Italy and elsewhere. So we want
to start paying our taxes in maize. And at
first, the patricians in Venice said, no,
we want wheat and we control you. So the
battle eventually was won by the peasants in the terra
firma. And because of the, the, the
the plague and other kinds of situations, they won
the day and were allowed to pay their taxes in
maize. And of course, maize then becomes the
basis for the diet in northern Italy of polenta rather
than pasta is an importation from Southern Italy. And
the same thing happens where maize is introduced in uh
in Africa where fa farmers find it help help important
to adapt maize as their fundamental crop. But one
of the liabilities of maize is it has insufficient amino
acids. So you have the pro from palabra is
disease that you find especially in agricultural societies in Southern
the American South, in Italy and any and in
southern Africa, any place you have a dominance of
maize in the diet that came as part of,
of maize being a really popular crop for farmers to
grow is Pella is a skin disease and you find
it places where the diet becomes too dependent on maize
. But you don't find that in Mid America because
in Mesoamerica, they process maize using lies and change
the chemistry so that you get a complete uh amino
acid and complete protein by having a maize based diet
. It has to do with processing. How do
you process the maze? But they didn't do that
in um in other places, Italy, Africa,
the southern us where Pella becomes a serious problem until
it's understood that you have to complete the proteins by
, by research in the early 20th century. And
when exactly did maize get to Africa? Well,
we don't, of course, completely know, but
we can look at um places early on, we
begin to get adaptation. For example, a na
uh the names given to maize you find in places
in Nigeria or West Africa that the the words for
maize tell us something. The the um the Akan
in Ghana, uh the word for, for,
for maize means something from the foreigners in Ethiopia.
Then one of the words for a maze was Yar
Maila. In other words, the sor go from
across the ocean, it looks maize looks like.
So, so sorghum or Sorghum looks like maize when
it's growing early on. But that the factor of
people recognizing saying it's the so them from across the
sea. And now when you go to to the
place of within Ethiopia, I work, it's just
called Mahila, which just means Sorghum, it's not
Sorghum. But people understand that the word tells you
people's perceptions of when this arrived. Uh So exact
dates by the time the Portuguese arrive in Ethiopia,
they're finding some maize there and they tell us what
they're growing. And you can see the maize has
already arrived. But we don't have a clear historical
record because that's something takes place in the basic level
of human subsistence and doesn't make it into the historical
sources quite as clearly as it does later on.
And how does maize tie to Africa's Green Revolution?
Well, the Green Revolution originally was done with rice
for South Asia. So, so for India,
South Asia and so that revolution was about doing short
, short that you have to have, you have
to have water and you have to have fertilizer and
you get a huge growth in food production in South
Asia for Africa. The the the attempt has been
to say yes, maize is going to be for
Africa like rice was for South Asia and that's done
by has been done by corporations by USA ID International
Organizations. Um The key center for research on maize
is in Mexico City when I visited there. Uh
I was taken to uh there was Ethiopian there who
I got, I work in Ethiopia. So we
became friends. He took me to a rural site
outside of Mexico City. Uh and they were growing
their maize seed for which was going to be introduced
to Ethiopia. Uh So the international nature of the
research going on now the Green Revolution, the idea
was maize can be the center point of that for
Africa, but with the problems that maze has about
stability and about incomplete proteins. And so what he
this Ethiopian scientist was doing, I'm developing a new
variety with complete um proteins. So it would have
to be identified having a market value, you pay
more for those seeds to have complete proteins. And
this this uh type of maize though was also introduced
elsewhere in Africa is part of what people hoped would
be a green rev kind of green revolution. And
it has done that the improvement in the the yield
of the maize, you improve maize is substantial to
um 68 tons per hectare compared to two tons per
hectare in local varieties. So that is Africa was
has been seen as the key to that in many
ways. It is although for example, Ethiopian restaurants
are very popular in around the world but in in
the US and in in Europe and you will not
find maize even though it's the number one crop in
Ethiopia, you will not find maize on the diet
of Ethiopia, the menu of Ethiopian restaurants because it's
not traditionally their ideal food, the food of poverty
. Um you can buy ears of maize on the
street, roasted maize on the street, very inexpensive
. But as a as a fund fundamental part of
diet problematic. And why is it that uh when
it comes to Africa, people decided on maize?
I mean, why wasn't it some other crop.
Well, they have, you can, you can
look at each individual situation. The place I work
in Ethiopia, they had a full maize came very
late. It was there as a garden crop,
early yielding. It's the first crop of the year
. You have it in your, your household garden
. Um, you get the first milky stage,
you can eat milky stage maize or wait, wait
till it dries and then process it. But it's
the first crop you're going to get. Um But
there, there they had other crops, they had
death in wheat and barley. And it was a
very, very diversified cropping system. The farmers understood
well in other places, places in Southern Africa,
for example, it arrived, it replaced Sorghum because
it was much more productive. And the African farmers
all over Southern Africa said this thing will give us
a yield quickly and it is a food that we
can adapt into our diet. So sorghum has almost
disappeared. And maize is the crop that has many
different varieties in all the countries of Southern Africa.
All different names. Basically, it's what Americans would
call, call grits or Italians would call polenta.
Uh So maze in its various forms, ref reflects
the the choice of farmers to say this thing gives
an early yield. But the new varieties, the
green revolution varieties yield much later and you don't eat
them at the m milky stage. At the green
stage. You have, you have to wait and
dry them and then process them. So it feeds
into the industrialization of of mills that began to change
the way that the market affected. What kind of
maize farmers were growing. And the government would say
, ok, you may, may grow only this
kind of maize because we cannot sell colored maize.
B maize drops out of the market because the international
market say we want white maize. And if yellow
maize is grown, yellow maize is useful for poultry
who likes white yolks and their eggs, the yellow
comes from the beta carotene in the yellow maize.
Hm So you have these adaptations where the Millers are
saying we want this kind of maize because that's the
one we can sell into international markets. And so
you have it for Africa. Virtually all of the
African maize is white in the US, maize is
for livestock and you want your, your the fat
of your livestock to be kind of a little bit
yellow. So the the yellow maize is dominant in
North America and in Europe too, white maize is
still there. You can buy polenta, either white
or red, depending on your taste. What you're
eating the polenta with, with, with fish or
with uh with, with the tomato sauce, et
cetera. So these are consumer preferences that reflect the
larger market preferences of the kind of maize that farmers
are going to be growing to produce commercially for the
market. So uh politics and economics also certainly play
a big role in the adoption and spread of maize
across Africa. Right? Yes. So if you
look at a place like Zimbabwe, which did fantastic
research on maize development, the law system eventually through
the 20th century said, OK, you may not
grow maize which is not white. Uh because white
is the international market and we're producing some of the
best hybrid maize developed through research came out not out
of the North America, out of Rhodesia, Southern
Rhodesia, which became Zimbabwe. Because the the,
the, the maize, the scientists there, the
white, the white Rhodesian scientists developed a incredibly productive
uh variety. But for that variety of, of
really um productive maze in terms of, of the
of the economic perspective that you had to have just
the right soils, just the right moisture, just
the right seasonal conditions. And of course, the
white population in Southern Rhodesia controlled those things. And
the the black farmers were not given access to this
new variety. These new varieties incredibly productive is from
a scientific point of view, economic point of view
. But you also founded. This is a story
I got when I was doing work, work in
Zimbabwe, one of those scientists showed me a chart
he made, he said, chart showed, wait
a second. Why is suddenly this this production going
up? But we're not, we're not charting.
He said in his own handwriting, he wrote in
this little chart from the 19 sixties. He showed
me this chart when I interviewed him, he wrote
African farmers. In other words, African farmers had
found the, the, the new crop, the
new variety and were using it and adapting it in
their own terms. Even though the government was trying
to suppress their, their role in production of,
of, of maize. Very, very, very
political economic, in a fascinating way, which is
what led me into and what led me into you
didn't ask this question, but I'll answer it anyway
. How did I begin to understand and, and
want to explore more of the role of maize because
I grew up with maize fields all around me as
a kid. I grew up in Illinois and Illinois
is a big maize producing area. But when I
was interviewing farmers in Ethiopia after the famine, uh
there was a socialist government in place that was trying
to control farmer activities and farmers were growing their different
varieties of crops. And then suddenly when I said
, OK, what did you go last year,
the year before that? It's a year before that
. They were saying, well, this is the
maize, maize, maize, maize. Really?
I said maize is drought is drought um affected.
Um it, it it is not the best nutrition
in the world, it doesn't fit your normal diet
. Why are you doing this? And so I
began to understand it's because the government is saying we
don't care what you grow as long as you pay
in these other crops. And they said that maize
was safe because the government wouldn't take it from him
. It was a political decision that, that affected
what farmers did, right? Uh And uh I
mean, uh going along the uh that line of
what uh I would also like to ask you a
little bit about the particular case of South Africa,
which you have done some work on. Uh you
mentioned science there for example. And I asked you
about politics, but in the particular case of South
Africa, uh in what ways did politics, science
and race intermingle there? Well, for Southern Africa
, we you know the politics, we know of
the the arrival of Europeans in the 17th century and
then spread from the cape into colonial settings that were
originally the the arrival of uh Dutch later on the
the the British Empire incorporated that but the basic population
still was agricultural. Um And they of course had
needs for the mines. So the Southern African economies
were about gold first, sorry, diamonds first,
then gold and that became the diamond. So what
do you need? You need labor? Mhm And
when the labor is the black population which needs to
be fed and the the mine owners were having to
determine what do we feed our mine workers to keep
them healthy enough to work and maize became the key
crop for them. Uh And the the word Milly
. Milly pop is a South African word for polenta
or for the basic maize, which comes from the
Portuguese Mili. So merely was not maize, but
word came to include maize from the original Portuguese.
And so you have this phenomenon of the mind economy
, creating a sense of what is what is good
food. Um And eventually the population came to define
their full bellies is the feeling you get when you've
eaten a big batch of maize. And when that
becomes a kind of a cultural norm of what feeling
full is um maize becomes that key ingredient. So
the the miners also went back to their family farms
when they worked, headed out of the mines and
they began to grow maize as down the crop.
And that was women doing the work back home where
men were the miners earning wages. And therefore the
the core diet became maze because it was low labor
, lower labor. Somebody I did mention maze takes
less labor, you can broadcast it. Um You
don't have to do it by role, et cetera
. Uh So its characteristics meant it could be adapted
on small farms in which women's labor was the key
issue. So Southern Africa, it was about mining
, the economy and eventually became the accepted um diet
was maize was the core of any meal. Yes
, there was sorghum a little bit here and there
. You can still buy some Sorghum in South African
. Uh gro groceries. But for the most part
, the basic diet is maize, white maze.
Mhm. Right. And do we know if uh
maize has had uh any impact on the biodiversity of
Africa? Well, in some ways, it's a
negative effect because the farmer incentives with political context in
many cases is maize is the crop that's really yielding
. It gives a very good yield for small farmers
and you go to, you know, 6 to
8 tons per hectare of the new varieties. So
farmers are seeking both the commercial value of that to
to send to the the cities but also it is
very, very attractive is the local diet. Um
So the biodiversity pushing maize as as USA ID does
with the Agra, the the this big development program
based upon maize is the primary crop. Uh So
you have corporations Mon Monsanto and of course May's production
, Monsanto is now owned by by year. So
the big maize producers are all owned by drug companies
by chemical companies. Dupont owned all of those,
those early developers of of maize in North America in
Europe are all owned by now. Chemical drug companies
, Dupont Bayer um go down the line. So
it it becomes a corporate crop and farmers are are
dealing with markets and their own food supply depending on
where you are in Africa. Maize is not the
dominant crop in every part of Africa. It is
in, it is in southern Africa. It is
in Kenya, Tanzania. Ugali is essentially grits polenta
. But for, for East Africa and that's I
had a friend, a Ugandan friend who came to
Ethiopia and she was dying to have ugali in her
diet because she's from Uganda and for her food,
met maize. At that point, Ethiopian restaurant,
Ethiopian national diet did not really include maize for the
middle and upper class. So, Mays has his
fun role, role. It's not a friend of
biodiversity. Mhm And uh a related question, do
we know what impact uh the introduction of maize had
on African people's nutrition and health. Well, I
mentioned pra too much dependent on maize but maize has
its place because it yields early depending on the variety
you're growing. You can be can be the first
thing that comes as the first crop you have.
We have often Af African cultures have celebrations of the
first crop. The the new year begins. The
first thing you can get is maize because you can
eat it the milky stage as we eat with with
uh we haven't mentioned there are five varieties of maize
, one of which is sweet corn, uh which
is the one you eat at the milky stage.
It's wonderful, delicious. Um Something in the fall
when the first maze comes in, you wanna have
um sweet corn. There's also popcorn, also dent
corn, also flint corn. These are both flint
corns which has the characters are scoring longer uh which
is a good thing, but they may take longer
to mature and you're not, you're not consuming them
at the early stage. So the the the role
of maize in the diet differs on which kind of
cuisines you're talking about which parts of Africa, Africa
, of course, is a wonderfully diverse place,
linguistically, culturally, in terms of diet and maize
plays an important part in a number of different African
diets. Mhm. So for the second part of
the interview, let's say, I would like to
ask you a few more general questions not specifically related
to maize itself. So uh particularly when I asked
you about Southern Africa and also earlier in the interview
, you mentioned a little bit of it, uh
we talked about colonialism. So uh what would you
say was the role played by colonialism when it comes
to spreading crops across the globe? And uh how
was the adoption of different crops influenced by it?
Well, it depends on the situation. We have
an example of Ethiopia where there was not formal colonialism
. The Italian period was only a few years.
So the adaptation was done essentially by farmers themselves,
taking advantage of what is available to them in terms
of their own strategies of cropping across a year and
feeding their community with a little bit of commercials,
selling of, of grains. But also the household
level. When you go to a place like Southern
Africa or or so Southern Africa, you have a
large arrival of the European population who are originally Dutch
and then English and then some Portuguese and different,
different groups arrive there. Europeans who control things who
are interested in feeding their labor and feeding themselves.
So you have in South Africa. So a wonderful
um tradition now of wine because some of the early
migrants out of Europe were Huguenots. The huguenots were
escaping France because they were oppressed by the Cat Catholic
majority there. And they began importing uh vineyards and
that became now today, some of the best places
to go and on wine tours in the world.
In my experience, South Africa is fantastic. Um
And that links to the minefields needed labor. The
certain minefield, the vineyards needed labor and those laborers
were eating increasingly maize getting back to maze but it
was and some places there was not a European population
in East Africa, Kenya a little bit Tanzania.
You had European populations that were affecting what farmers were
doing because they're expected that farmers would grow crops consumed
by Europeans. Uh West Africa, the conditions of
malaria, something else I work on malaria meant that
Europeans and large populations did not populate West Africa,
they would tend to populate as in, in um
in India hill stations that were fear from malaria.
So Europeans would con control those spaces and so the
population was allowed to keep um local varieties of foodstuffs
. So for example, in West Africa, you
had the possibility of, of uh maize could be
there as a first crop if you're clearing your forest
. But the, the crops you really want to
have in there are yam cassava, another manio,
another new world crop. Uh If you, you
know bubble tea. Uh yes, the bubbles are
maniac. A casa. We were OK. Uh
So you have these mixes sometimes called the Colombian exchange
of crops coming from the old new world to the
old world. I call it the I call it
not the exchange, but the circulation because the food
crops along with peoples are circulating and bringing their preferred
foods with them. So in West Africa, you
have forest crops, yams, they're, they're grown
in the, in the, in the, in
the forest floor. Uh Maize is there for the
first crop but then people want to get into yams
and, and cassava and other kinds of crops taken
from the forest, the biodiversity of the forest.
So all that's changing, of course as cities grow
. But the colonial effect is greatest in some places
where there could be new neo Europe such as southern
Africa, Kenya. But where there's factions of disease
, the African population had resistance to uh the Europeans
would tend to avoid those areas, control them for
pro production of food and for mining, et cetera
. But uh maize there was, it's, it's
it's interest came from farmers themselves. But also because
Europeans were happy to have those workers under, under
colonial rule fed and the maze then became a key
part of that process of nutrition. Mhm. So
uh in historical scholarship, one approach that people have
is to look at the causal relationship between climate and
history. Uh What do you think of it?
Climate is fundamental to history, climate about seasonality.
What is the annual cycle of, of availability of
moisture? Uh Disease is also sea seasonal affected by
climate by issues of climate. It's the thing I'm
working on now is sort of the more fundamental issue
about water, water, its presence, its absence
, its movement, it's movement through the seasons.
And this is deeply within the issue of climate change
, climate change, velvet of water. But of
course, just look at today's stuff in, in
Ukraine. But what do you do when you want
to defeat your enemy? This is what the Germans
did in Italy in World War Two. They said
we're gonna stop the allied invasion in Italy by flooding
the farmers' fields because then that will encourage malaria which
will affect the invading army. In this case,
the British American uh invasion of Italy. And that
was a specific military plan, what's going on now
, even though we're not quite identifying the source of
it. This is what the Russians are doing.
They said we're going to blow up this dam and
we're gonna flood this entire area to impede the movement
of, of, of military activity and this gets
back to the seasons in which empires within Africa,
within Ethiopia. For example, the the the armies
moved only during the dry season. If you move
during the wet season, then the areas with malarial
. Uh so the seasonality of wind moisture is available
is a big deal militarily in terms of the production
of food. In terms of, you know,
if you, if you look at people who are
traveling, describing events in Africa or the conditions in
Africa, Europeans writing down what they're, what they're
encountering, they only traveled in the dry season.
They're only giving a partial view of what they're seeing
because they wouldn't go during the wet season because it's
one, it's muddy two, it's malarial and the
local merchants and, and uh moving around are only
doing their movement during that seasonality. The seasons change
, different parts of Africa, but it's that seasonal
change and the, the issue of climate change,
which is now having major effects, right? Uh
So I would like to ask you one last question
slash topic. So, uh of course, when
it comes to history, um I would like to
ask you, what do you think of approaches by
people like Jared Diamond when it comes to explaining why
certain societies became more successful than others and what we
could call or at least some people call uh geographical
determinism. Well, that's always been a factor of
how much is, are the conditions deterministic and Jared
Diamond lays out an argument. That's interesting. To
challenge and it's good that it's there. And it's
, it's, it's an attempt at universal explanation of
human movement, human political economic domination based around on
environmental issues to some degree. That's true. Um
And I think that that any consideration of politics or
of economic change or of interaction between different kinds of
political systems um has its foundations, environmental issue in
environmental issues. The fact that Europeans coming to Africa
or even to North America or to, to the
new world. It's about the movement of knowledge.
Part of that Colombian circulation I mentioned was the arrival
in Latin America of people who knew how to deal
with couple of climates. The people, the the
the selection of who is that most valued as labor
out of the slave trade, going to the to
the Carolinas in the US because the ones who are
most valued came from Santa Gambia. They knew how
to grow rice and the the plantation owners. And
so in, in um in the Carolinas were stayed
in their, their uplands and in areas that were
not so much so affected by malaria or other diseases
and their, their African slaves were allowed to move
into swampy areas because they knew how to grow.
Um love rima rice. They were adapting the environment
, they knew, they knew how to deal with
health, knew how to deal with production. And
so the knowledge that moved into the new world also
was a key part of this whole exchange and politics
got into who controlled who but also adaptation to environmental
issues. If you want to understand the geography of
Ethiopia is a, is a place that's a place
I work. Most, you know, look at
climate seasonality and you see that people would move in
and out of areas that were affected by malaria or
where they could grow one crop or another crop and
then harvest it and get back to a safer area
. Big factor and you a diamond is helpful to
have that, that um that perspective that is environmental
determinism, but they will have nuance by local areas
. And that's the beautiful part of doing the,
doing the work and working with different people in different
places. Mhm. So, yeah. Uh I
mean, I've also asked you about that because of
course, a big part of Jared Diamond's argument is
based on uh crops also, of course domesticated animals
in certain specific latitudes in the world. Uh And
uh since of course, our interview has been focused
so much on maize and we touched on some other
crops as well. Uh I was wondering, I
mean, to what extent you would think um the
factors that Jared Diamond points to uh I, I
mean, what uh how much of a role do
you think they would play in human history? Well
, I would add to Jared Diamond as, as
a um kind of marker of environmental determinism with a
reasonable coherent and somewhat persuasive argument. But look at
Alfred Crosby who coined the term the Columbian exchange that
I modified to publicly of the interaction. Um It
is is that uh Alfred Crosby talks about the the
biological imperialism because the the arrival in the new world
of cattle and pigs, right? And chickens and
part of this global circulation transforms the the physical environment
. When you release hogs into the environment, they
are extremely good at going feral and they, they
, they change the physical world they live in and
humans are both either hunting them or trying to domesticate
them or the the animals and the plants, of
course, maize being a big one of globalization,
but this is also true of other, other crops
and other kinds of animals. Um you know,
goats, sheep, cattle, horses, all of
these things that transform the worlds they they move to
and the adaptation of local populations quickly to the horse
. For example, you know, native Americans in
North America adaptations of the horse, suddenly they become
mobile, suddenly they, they're able to hunt in
different ways. Suddenly they're able to, to to
expand their own local local control over different com competing
groups in new, in new ways. So the
the Alfred Crosby approach to this, which has been
adapted by people, scholars from, from all over
the world are incorporating these ideas and and playing them
out in local areas that makes sense for them.
But Jared Diamond more popular is, is something to
read. Uh It's kind of New York Times best
seller list. But the Alfred Crosby stuff is also
uh to me uh very good. And the colleagues
I work with who are specialists when I, when
I go someplace, it's not that I know things
others don't know. But I absorb as his historian
, I'm absorbing the knowledge and interacting with my colleagues
, whether it's in Ghana, we were talking about
the introduction of maize or in Ethiopia where we're driving
through the countryside and I'm saying, what's going on
there? We're walking through the countryside. And I'm
always asking questions because they have the knowledge that I've
been trying to interpret for a larger uh audience as
an academic, as a historian. So these things
are very, very global, it helps to have
people kind of tweaking the narrative by publishing books like
Jared Diamond. But it's not that we say gee
he's got it. Right. Um He's after all
, you know, his original background, he's a
gastroenterologist. Mhm. Right. And we trust doctors
to a degree. Yes. Yeah. Right.
So uh Doctor mccann, uh I'm leaving a link
to your book Maze And Grace, a History of
Africa's encounter with the new World Cup crop in the
description box of the interview. Uh Would you like
to mention any places on the internet where people can
find your work? Well, I think the internet
being what it is, you can, you can
do that. Um What I'm getting now, I
just was at Oxford University Press asked me to write
a chapter on malaria in Africa. And malaria in
Africa came from my own work with, again,
with colleagues um who work on malaria in Africa and
elsewhere. But um people I got malaria when I
was doing field work in Africa uh in, in
Ethiopia, you know, an area where the maize
stuff was going on. And I didn't ask go
malaria. But suddenly I had 100 and five degree
fever and had to go back out of my my
rural area five hours by mule to get to the
nearest road to the nearest light bulb. Oh my
God. And so malaria became an interest and the
maze. Malaria connection is one chapter of of um
maize and grace. And so male malaria is where
I I appear on the internet. I'm constantly getting
notes saying you've been cited by these 100 times.
I said really I'm not doing and it's, it's
mainly now about the medical malaria stuff that links to
the maze. All these things are linked. Um
And now back to the North Fundament of water in
which I'm doing a plenary panel for a international meeting
in Finland next year. And that is to draw
people together around what is the meaning of water?
Meanings of water as something physical is something psychological is
something cultural and water takes us to all kinds of
ways that people signify their sainthood if they're in a
, in a, uh religious religious setting. Um
, and for example, in the 88, the
18 fifties, this short story, the British traveler
in Ethiopia came down with fever and it's called eu
, he understood this as I have a fever.
What do I do? He's riding around the countryside
with people and they said, what you need to
do is stand in this tree and we're gonna dump
water on your head and this will deal with your
fever. He said, well, first of all
, it knocked him off, his horse, knocked
him senseless and he felt slightly better at the end
of this ordeal. At the same time, there's
someone in Malvern England who's going through a water therapy
treatment, somewhat, somewhat similar and that person was
Charles Darwin. So water is this, this,
this universal, of course, it's universal, but
the nuances and local cultures and local material versus belief
systems is the thing that I'm working on now.
And you find examples of that all over the world
where suddenly cli that links to climate change. Very
interesting. So, Doctor mccann, uh thank you
so much for taking the time to come on the
show. It's been a real pleasure to talk to
you too. Say no or the equivalent of the
Italian. Yeah. In this case, uh it
would be bo part here. It's still the afternoons
. OK? Time change, time change. So
thank you very much Ricardo. Very interesting. You're
, you're uh you're a good, you're a good
interviewer. Thank you. Hi guys. Thank you
for watching this interview. Until the end. If
you liked it, please do not forget to like
it, share, comment and subscribe. And if
you like more generally what I'm doing, please consider
support the show on Patreon or paypal. You have
all of the links in the description of this interview
. This show is brought to you by En Lights
learning and development. Done differently. Check their website
at alights dot com. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters per Larson, Jerry Mueller and Frederick Sunda
Bernards O of Election and Viser Adam Castle Matthew Whit
Whitting Bear, no wolf, Tim Hollis, Eric
Alania John Connors, Philip Forrest, Connelly, Robert
Winde, Nai Zoup, Mark Nevs Colin Holbrook,
Simon Columbus Phil, Governor Michael Stormer Samuel Andreev for
the Alexander Dan Bauer, Fergal Ken Hall, her
og Michel Jonathan lebron Jars and the Samuel K,
Eric Heins, Mark Smith, Jan We Amal S
Franz David Sloan Wilson Yasa Des Roma Roach Diego,
Jannik Punter, Da Man Charlotte Bli Nicole Barbar Wam
and Pao Assy Naw Guy Madison, Gary GH,
some of the Adrian Yin Nick Golden Paul talent in
Ju Bar was Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Bronner
, Douglas Fry Franca Bertolotti, Gabriel Pan Cortez Lelis
Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sonny Smith,
John Wiesman, Martin Aland, Daniel Friedman, William
Buck. Paul George Arnold Luke Lo A Georges the
offense, Chris Williamson, Peter Oren David Williams the
Costa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw and Murray
Martinez Chevalier, Bangalore atheists Larry Daley Junior, Holt
Eric B. Starry Michael Bailey then Sperber Robert Grassy
Rough the RP MD. Ior Jeff mcmahon, Jake
Zul Barnabas Radix, Mark Campbell, Richard Bowen Thomas
the Dubner, Luke Ni and Greece story, Manuel
Oliveira, Kimberly Johnson and Benjamin Gilbert. A special
thanks to my producers, these our web gem Frank
Luca Stan. Tom Weam Bernard ni Ortiz Dixon Benedict
Mueller Vege, Gli Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin John Carlo Montenegro, Robert Lewis and Al Nick
Ortiz. And to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender
, Serge Adrian and Bogdan Kut. Thank you for
all.